[Launch Week] pgzx: Update 0.2.0 (#284)
xataio/mdx-blog: pgzx-update-0.2.0.mdx

---
title: 'pgzx: Version 0.2.0 update'
description: 'Learn about the latest changes in pgzx'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgzx-banner.png
  alt: pgzx
author: Steffen Siering
authorEmail: steffen@xata.io
date: 07-19-2024
tags: ['open-source', 'postgres', 'fpPgzx', 'oss']
ublished: false
slug: pgzx-update-0.2.0
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgzx-banner.png
---

We introduced [pgzx](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx) during our last launch
week 4 months ago. As part of this summers' [Xata launch week]() we are bumping
the version to 0.2.0. We are excited to share some details about the recent
changes improvements.

> pgzx is our open-source framwork for developing PostgreSQL extensoins in Zig.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pgzx is our open-source framework for developing PostgreSQL extensions in Zig.
```

In case it is the first time you hear of pgzx and are intrigued, you can find more
details in our "[Introducing pgzx](https://xata.io/blog/introducing-pgzx/)"
blog post.

We made quite a number of improvements since the first update.
Unfortunately this also includes some breaking changes. Lets have a look at
this releases highlights:

# Zig update

Zig 0.13 is the latest stable release, but the Zig toolchain, including the
compiler, build system, and standard library, is still in development and
breaking changes do happen every now and then. For this reason we currently do
not focus on a specific Zig version, but try to follow the latest Zig
changes in the master branch.

The Nix based development shell uses
[zig-overlay](https://github.com/mitchellh/zig-overlay) in conjunction with the
`flake.lock` file to pin the zig toolchain version to a recent commit ID.

The dependency is updated by us every so often and we try to test and fix
breaking changes when updating the toolchain version. We highly recommend to

> use the projects develoment shell when testing the example extensions provided,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use the projects development shell when testing the example extensions provided,
```

purposes.

The underlying error reporting API has been rewritten to follow the C API more closely. For example:

```zig
    elog.ereport(@src(), .Error, .{
        elog.errcode(pg.ERRCODE_UNDEFINED_OBJECT),
        elog.errmsg("Foreign schema \"{s}\" does not exist", .{foreign_schema_name}),
    });
```

Originally we've been considering to use the builder pattern for the elog API,
but we found it a little inflexible when combinig the builder with the C-API.
Plus we had been forced to allocate buffers for messages in advance, even if
the PostgreSQL would have discarded the message.

The new API works more similar to the C-API. In the example given `ereport`
will check if the message will be emitted or discarded by calling `errstart`.
The `errcode` and `errmsg` functions will only be executed if `errstart`
returns true.

How does this work? Well, we use a mix of comptime and a pattern known to the
[Go](https://go.dev/) community as "Functional Options". In essence in the
functional options pattern a function accepts a variable number of arguments
where each argument implements a common interface. This can be a function or an

> actual Go interface. The receiver might establishe an internal 'context' and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actual Go interface. The receiver might establish an internal 'context' and
```

> actual Go interface. The receiver might establishe an internal 'context' and

Reviewer: I got a bit confused by:

> This can be a function or an actual Go interface.

Is it about the arguments?

Author: Yeah, it is about the argument.

---
title: 'pgzx: Version 0.2.0 update'
description: 'Learn about the latest changes in pgzx'
image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgzx-banner.png
  alt: pgzx
author: Steffen Siering
authorEmail: steffen@xata.io
date: 07-19-2024
tags: ['open-source', 'postgres', 'fpPgzx', 'oss']
published: false
slug: pgzx-update-0.2.0
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgzx-banner.png
---

> We introduced [pgzx](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx) during our last launch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We introduced [pgzx](https://xata.io/pgzx) during our last launch
```

Reviewer 2: Adding our feature page here as good for SEO. Will mention github a little further down.

> week 4 months ago. As part of this summers' [Xata launch week]() we are bumping

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
week 4 months ago. As part of this summers' [Xata launch week](https://xata.io/launch-week-elephant-on-the-move) we are bumping
```

the version to 0.2.0. We are excited to share some details about the recent

> changes improvements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
improvements.
```

> pgzx is our open-source framework for developing PostgreSQL extensions in Zig.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[pgzx is our open-source framework](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx) for developing PostgreSQL extensions in Zig.
```

> In case it is the first time you hear of pgzx and are intrigued, you can find more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case it's the first time hearing about pgzx and you are intrigued, you can find more
```

details in our "[Introducing pgzx](https://xata.io/blog/introducing-pgzx/)"
blog post.

We made quite a number of improvements since the first update.

> Unfortunately this also includes some breaking changes. Lets have a look at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unfortunately this also includes some breaking changes. Let's have a look at
```

> this releases highlights:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the highlights for this release:
```

## Function Manager

> The Function Manager interface allows you to register functions with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Function Manager interface allows you to register functions with
```

PostgreSQL so you can call them from SQL.

> In this iteration we've added support for optional Zig error returns to `PG_FUNCTION_V1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this iteration, we've added support for optional Zig error returns to `PG_FUNCTION_V1`.
```

With this improvement you can now return an error from your function like so:

```zig
comptime {
    pgzx.PG_FUNCTION_V1("hello_world", hello_world);
}

pub fn hello_world(name: ?[:0]const u8) ![:0]const u8 {
    return if (name) |n|
        try std.fmt.allocPrintZ(pgzx.mem.PGCurrentContextAllocator, "Hello, {s}!", .{n})
    else
        "Hello World";
}
```

> If the PostgresSQL MemoryContext runs out of memory our allocator will capture

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the PostgreSQL MemoryContext runs out of memory, our allocator will capture
```

the error and return `PGErrorStack` to indicate that a Postgres error was
reported. The Zig error will be returned by the hello world function. The
wrapper generated by `PG_FUNCTION_V1` will then do a longjump to pass the error

> back to PostgresSQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
back to PostgreSQL.
```

Exporting a number of functions can become a bit tedious when you want to
export multiple functions. In that case you might want to use `PG_EXPORT`.
`PG_EXPORT` will export all public functions from the struct given:

```zig
comptime {
    pgzx.PG_EXPORT(sqlfns);
}

const sqlfns = struct {
    pub fn hello_world(name: ?[:0]const u8) ![:0]const u8 {
        return if (name) |n|
            try std.fmt.allocPrintZ(pgzx.mem.PGCurrentContextAllocator, "Hello, {s}!", .{n})
        else
            "Hello World";
    }
};
```

We have added a sample extension called
[`sqlfns`](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx/tree/main/examples/sqlfns) that

> demonstrates multiple ways on how you can write a SQL function in Zig. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
demonstrates multiple ways to write a SQL function in Zig. The
```

> sample extension documents different ways on how to export a function, accept

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sample extension documents different ways to export a function, accept
```

arguments and return values.

## Server Programming Interface (SPI) support

The PostgreSQL Server Programming Interface
([SPI](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/spi.html)) is a C API for
extensions that simplifies access to the database.

With this release we improve our SPI support.

You can find a sample extension using the `pgzx.spi` module in the
[`examples/spi_sql`](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx/tree/main/examples/spi_sql)
folder.

> With this release we introduce the `pgzx.spi.query` function that returns a `Rows` data type for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this release we also introduced the `pgzx.spi.query` function that returns a `Rows` data type for
```

you to iterate over the result set. When creating the `Rows` we do capture the
`SPI_tuptable` result allowing you to run other queries while iterating over
the rows.

Although `rows` has a `scan` method for converting the current record into Zig

> types we would recommend you to use `queryTyped` which returns a typed `RowsOf`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
types, we recommend you use `queryTyped` which returns a typed `RowsOf`
```

        .limit = 1,
        .args = .{
            .types = &[_]pg.Oid{pg.TEXTOID},
            .values = &[_]pg.NullableDatum{try toNullableDatum(name)},
        },
    });
    defer rows.deinit();

    if (try rows.next()) |id| {
        return @intCast(id);
    }

    if (!missing_ok) {
        try elog.ereportNoJump(@src(), .Error, .{
            elog.errcode(pg.ERRCODE_UNDEFINED_OBJECT),
            elog.errmsg("cluster \"{s}\" does not exist", .{name}),
        });
    }
    return pg.InvalidOid;
```

You can also use `queryTyped` with a struct:

```zig
    const NodeInfo = struct {
        server: pg.Oid,
        foreign_schema: [:0]const u8,
    };

    const QUERY = "SELECT cnserver, cnfschema FROM cluster_nodes WHERE ccluster = $1 ORDER BY random()";
    var rows = try pgzx.spi.queryTyped(NodeInfo, QUERY, .{
        .limit = 1,
        .args = .{
            .types = &[_]pg.Oid{pg.OIDOID},
            .values = &[_]pg.NullableDatum{
                try pgzx.datum.toNullableDatum(cluster.id),
            },
        },
    });
    defer rows.deinit();
    const random_node = try rows.next();
```

The SPI interface requires you to connect and finish to the SPI subsystem.

> Internally SPI will maintain a stack of "SPI frames". Often times you will find

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internally SPI will maintain a stack of "SPI frames". Often at times you will find
```

yourself writing:

```zig
    pgzx.spi.connect();
    defer pgzx.spi.finish();
```

> If you want to return unprocessed `Rows` from a function you must not use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to return unprocessed `Rows` from a function, you must not use
```

`pgzx.spi.finish` yet. Either the caller needs to establish the SPI stack frame
or you have to transfer ownership of the stack frame (meaning someone must call `finish`).

> Alternatively you can use the `pgzx.spi.OwnedSPIFrameRows` type like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively you can use the `pgzx.spi.OwnedSPIFrameRows` type:
```

```zig
    pgzx.spi.connect();
    errdefer pgzx.spi.finish();

    var rows = pgzx.spi.queryTyped(u32, ..., .{});
    return rows.owned();
```

When the caller uses `rows.deinit()` we will automatically call `pgzx.spi.finish()` for you.

## Error logging API overhaul (`pgzx.elog`)

We still support the helper functions `elog.Error`, `elog.Warning`,
`elog.Notice` and friends. We also introduced `WithCause` variants like:

```zig
pub fn WarningWithCause(src: SourceLocation, cause: anyerror, comptime fmt: []const u8, args: anytype) void;
```

The `WithCause` variants will check the `cause` argument. If the error code is
`PGErrorStack` we emit the captured error report and emit the new report. If it

> is any other Zig error code we append it to the message. These utilities are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is any other Zig error code, we append it to the message. These utilities are
```

mostly for convenience and nice to have when adding logs for debugging
purposes.

The underlying error reporting API has been rewritten to follow the C API more closely. For example:

```zig
    elog.ereport(@src(), .Error, .{
        elog.errcode(pg.ERRCODE_UNDEFINED_OBJECT),
        elog.errmsg("Foreign schema \"{s}\" does not exist", .{foreign_schema_name}),
    });
```

> Originally we've been considering to use the builder pattern for the elog API,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Originally we've been considering using the builder pattern for the elog API,
```

> but we found it a little inflexible when combinig the builder with the C-API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
but we found it a little inflexible when combining the builder with the C-API.
```

Plus we had been forced to allocate buffers for messages in advance, even if

> the PostgreSQL would have discarded the message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL would have discarded the message.
```

> The new API works more similar to the C-API. In the example given `ereport`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new API works similar to the C-API. In the example given `ereport`
```

will check if the message will be emitted or discarded by calling `errstart`.
The `errcode` and `errmsg` functions will only be executed if `errstart`
returns true.

How does this work? Well, we use a mix of comptime and a pattern known to the

> [Go](https://go.dev/) community as ["Functional Options"](https://commandcenter.blogspot.com/2014/01/self-referential-functions-and-design.html). In essence in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Go](https://go.dev/) community as ["Functional Options"](https://commandcenter.blogspot.com/2014/01/self-referential-functions-and-design.html). In essence, in the
```

> functional options pattern a function accepts a variable number of arguments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
functional options pattern, a function accepts a variable number of arguments
```

where each argument implements a common interface. The accepted argument type
can be a function or an actual Go interface. The receiver might establish an
internal 'context' and calls each passed argument with the given context. Once
all options have updated the 'context', it is used as configuration of the
function body.

In the `elog` API the `errcode` and `errmsg` functions are the functional
options. The `errmsg` type will capture the format string and the arguments,
but it is up to `ereport` to actually call `errmsg`, which will finally use
`std.fmt` to format the message and pass it to the C-API.

The `FmtMessage(C-function, format, args)` function is a generic function that
implements the functional options interface:

```zig
    fn FmtMessage(comptime msgtype: anytype, comptime fmt: []const u8, comptime Args: type) type {
        return struct {
            args: Args,

            pub inline fn call(self: @This()) void {
                var memctx = mem.getErrorContextThrowOOM();
                const msg = std.fmt.allocPrintZ(memctx.allocator(), fmt, self.args) catch unreachable();
                _ = msgtype(msg.ptr);
            }
        };
    }
```

> Like all formatting functions in Zig we capture the format string as a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like all formatting functions in Zig, we capture the format string as a
```

`comptime` argument and return a new Zig type. The type only captures the
arguments at runtime.

> Now we can implement `errmsg` and others like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we can implement `errmsg` and others:
```

```zig
pub inline fn errmsg(comptime fmt: []const u8, args: anytype) FmtMessage(pg.errmsg, fmt, @TypeOf(args)) {
    return .{ .args = args };
}

pub inline fn errdetail(comptime fmt: []const u8, args: anytype) FmtMessage(pg.errdetail, fmt, @TypeOf(args)) {
    return .{ .args = args };
}

pub inline fn errdetail_log(comptime fmt: []const u8, args: anytype) FmtMessage(pg.errdetail_log, fmt, @TypeOf(args)) {
    return .{ .args = args };
}

pub inline fn errhint(comptime fmt: []const u8, args: anytype) FmtMessage(pg.errhint, fmt, @TypeOf(args)) {
    return .{ .args = args };
}
```

And `ereport` decides if and when to format the string:

```zig
pub inline fn ereport(src: SourceLocation, level: Level, opts: anytype) void {
    ereportDomain(src, level, null, opts);
}

pub inline fn ereportDomain(src: SourceLocation, level: Level, domain: ?[:0]const u8, opts: anytype) void {
    if (errstart(level, domain)) {
        inline for (opts) |opt| opt.call();
        errfinish(src, .{ .allow_longjmp = true }) catch unreachable;
    }
}
```

> Once our `ereport` is compiled it behaves exactly like the C macros (minus us

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once our `ereport` is compiled, it behaves exactly like the C macros (minus 
```

using the zig string formatting functionality). The `errstart` function checks
if the message will be emitted and sets up the context in the error stack. The
given options update the active error context and `errfinish` finally emits the

> error message. Depending on the log level `errfinish` might also execute a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
error message. Depending on the log level, `errfinish` might also execute a
```

> longjump or eveen abort the current process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
longjump or even abort the current process.
```

Zig structs are awesome in so many ways. One rarely needs builders, let alone
the functional options pattern. Yet it seems it is a viable pattern for logging
and tracing APIs that are supposed to have low overhead when logging is
disabled.

## Zig update

Zig 0.13 is the latest stable release, but the Zig toolchain, including the
compiler, build system, and standard library, is still in development and
breaking changes do happen every now and then. For this reason we currently do
not focus on a specific Zig version, but try to follow the latest Zig
changes in the master branch.

The Nix based development shell uses
[zig-overlay](https://github.com/mitchellh/zig-overlay) in conjunction with the
`flake.lock` file to pin the zig toolchain version to a recent commit ID.

> The dependency is updated by us every so often and we try to test and fix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We update the dependency every so often and we try to test and fix
```

> breaking changes when updating the toolchain version. We highly recommend to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
breaking changes when updating the toolchain version. We highly recommend 
```

> use the projects development shell when testing the example extensions provided,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the projects development shell when testing the example extensions provided,
```

otherwise you might have problems compiling the extensions if you use an older
or newer Zig toolchain.

We understand not everyone is keen to install Nix locally. For getting to know

> the environment you can build and run a development shell in a local docker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the environment, you can build and run a development shell in a local docker
```

container. Use `./dev/docker/build.sh` to build the container and
`./dev/docker/run.sh` to start the dockerized development shell. Once you are
inside the containers development shell you can use `./ci/setup.sh` and
`./ci/run.sh` to build and run the projects tests.

## Foreign Data Wrapper

We initiated support for writing Foreign Data Wrappers
([FDW](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/fdwhandler.html)) in Zig. The
support is still very rudimentary and you still have to write C-style functions in
Zig. We plan to provide a more Zig idiomatic API in the future.

When writing an FDW you export 2 functions, the handler function that sets up a
list of callbacks for the FDW framework and a validator function that verifies
your FDWs options when users configure the server, user mapping, or foreign
table. The `pgzx.fdw` modules provides some helpers to declaratively define the
options your foreign data wrapper supports.

The options API also allows you to combine multiple configurations in case you
read a list of supported options from a library that you use for your
implementation.

> This example uses reads the available options from libpq into a global table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This example reads the available options from libpq into a global table:
```

Reviewer 2: Wasn't sure if this was meant to be either, or if it should read "uses and reads"?

Author: This sentence does not look "complete". Looks I got lost in code when I started the sentence. Will rewrite.

Reviewer 2: OK :) The revised sentence works for me!

const xact_conn_options = fdw.OptionList.init(&[_]fdw.Option{
    fdw.Option.Bool("keep_connections", pg.ForeignServerRelationId),
    fdw.Option.Bool("password_required", pg.UserMappingRelationId),
});

// libpq connection options.
var extension_libpq_options: ?[]fdw.Option = undefined;

fn pgdc_fdw_validator(list_datum: pg.Datum, catalog: pg.Oid) void {
    initPqOptions(); // read libpq options into extension_libpq_options

    const extension_options = fdw.MultiOptionList.init(&[_]fdw.OptionList{
        postgres_fdw_options,
        xact_conn_options,
        fdw.OptionList.init(extension_libpq_options.?),
    });

    const options = pg.untransformRelOptions(list_datum);
    fdw.validateOptions(extension_options, options, catalog);
}
```

The handler function can be implemented as follows:

```zig
fn pgdc_fdw_handler() pg.Datum {
    return pg.PointerGetDatum(pgzx.node.create(pg.FdwRoutines{
          .BeginForeignScan = ...,
          .IterateForeignScan = ...,
          .EndForeignScan = ...,
          ...
    }));
}
```

## Other changes

- Add some more utilities to pgzx.meta module.
- We updated the `pgzx.datum` module to also accept the type OID for a value as

>   hint to the converter. This is especially important when working with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  a hint to the converter. This is especially important when working with
```

Reviewer 2: Wasn't sure if this is what you meant here?

  strings, as different strings types might be encoded differently. We also
  export a number of helper functions for converting between pg.Datum and Zig
  strings in case the derived converter does not work well for you.
- Collections: Added `at` to `List` and `valuesIterator` to `HTab`.
- add `pgzx.node` module for working with the PostgreSQL `Node` type.

> - Build: we split the C header includes into a separate module named `pgsys`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Build: we split the C header included into a separate module named `pgsys`.
```

Author: why included? When working with C one uses `include` to reference a file (the contents of the other file is copied in place). I mean `includes` as a multiple included objects.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I understand. It just reads odd to me. What about "we split the C header _to include_ a separate module..." ?

Author: that wouldn't be what we did. How about 'We moved the C header includes into its own Zig module `pgsys`'?

  This also allows us to introduce modules using code generation in the future.
- Do not use `PG_HOME` environment variable in Zig build utilities. Instead the
  build utilities derive the PostgreSQL installation folder by looking up the
  parent folder of `pg_config --bindir`. The projects shell scripts still use

>   `PG_HOME` to locate the local PostgresSQL installation folder in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `PG_HOME` to locate the local PostgreSQL installation folder in the
```

  development shell.
- `pgzx.shmem`: Add `registerHooks` and `registerSharedState` convenience functions.
- We currently do not include all headers available, but rather selectively add
  new headers when needed. If you are missing a header, please open a PR or an
  issue on the [pgzx Github repository](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx). The
  full set of headers from the `foreign`, `nodes`, `optimizer`, and `catalog`

>   folder have been added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  folder have been added.
  
We'd love to hear from you. If you have any feedback, suggestions or questions, please open an issue in our [GitHub repo](https://github.com/xataio/pgzx),
reach out to us on [Discord](https://xata.io/discord) or follow us on [X / Twitter](https://twitter.com/xata).

You can follow along this week with a new announcement every day on our [launch week page](https://xata.io/launch-week-elephant-on-the-move) or just [pop into Discord](https://xata.io/discord) and say hi 👋
```
